[Nano ESP32] Pin Configuration (#1311)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-esp32/tutorials/pin-setup/pin-setup.md

---
title: Nano ESP32 Selecting Pin Configuration 
description: Learn how to switch between default & ESP32 pin configurations when programming your board.
author: Karl Söderby
hardware:
  - hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-esp32
tags: [ESP32, Pin Configuration]
---

> The [Arduino Nano ESP32](https://store.arduino.cc/nano-esp32) is a Nano form factor board based on an ESP32-S3 SoC. This board is part of the [Arduino Nano Family](https://store.arduino.cc/pages/nano-family), and follows the pinout of that specific form factor by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Arduino Nano ESP32](https://store.arduino.cc/nano-esp32) is a Nano form factor board based on an ESP32-S3 SoC. This board is part of the [Arduino Nano Family](https://store.arduino.cc/pages/nano-family), and follows the same pinout as all Nano boards. This is very convenient if you want to port a project from another Nano board, as you can preserve the same wiring and pin numbers in the code.
```

> When programming the board in the "default" mode, the pins labelled on the board matches the pins in the program, **but does not match the ESP32-S3**. This mode can be changed to use the "ESP32" pins instead.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
This means that if you want to control a pin you can simply use the pin number that is printed on the board itself:

```
// This will enable the pin marked with "8" on the board:
digitalWrite(8, HIGH);
```

However, some libraries previously written for ESP32 boards (to name a few: OneWire, FastLED, ESP32Servo) don't support the pin numbers printed on the board and require you to refer to the internal microcontroller's GPIO number instead.  For instance, to refer to the pin labelled "8" on the board such libraries expect you to write `17` in your code as that's the GPIO number corresponding to that pin.

For this purpose, we added a compatibility mode so that you can choose which numbering scheme you want to use:

* when porting an existing Arduino project from another Nano board, it's convenient to use the "Arduino pin" scheme which reflects the numbers printed on the board
* when using third-party libraries for ESP32, you should use the "GPIO number" scheme which corresponds to the internal numbers
````

> When programming the board in the "default" mode, the pins labelled on the board matches the pins in the program, **but does not match the ESP32-S3**. This mode can be changed to use the "ESP32" pins instead.

Reviewer 2: I think this should clearly mention we are referring to _numbers_ , not _labels_.

## Software & Hardware Needed

- [Arduino Nano ESP32](https://store.arduino.cc/nano-esp32)
- [Arduino IDE](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software)
- [Arduino ESP32 Core](https://github.com/arduino/arduino-esp32) (version 2.0.12 and above). Can be installed directly in the Arduino IDE.

## Different Pin Configurations

So why does the Nano ESP32 pins not match the ESP32 (MCU) pins? The Nano ESP32 was designed using the **Nano form factor**, a favorable form factor for many, which has consistently kept its pins for many years. 

This makes it possible to migrate an older Nano board, to a newer generation Nano (like the Nano ESP32), without having to change your hardware setup. 

This of course brings a separate issue, which is that by default, the Nano ESP32 does not use the ESP32's pinout. An example of this is:
- Pin `2` is actually `5`
- Pin `5` is actually `8`
- and so on..

It is common in a board's design that the actual microcontroller's pins doesn't match the header pins.

Luckily, we have two configurations available to choose between:
- **Nano (Default)**

> - **ESP32-S3 (Legacy)**.  

Author: Good point @pillo79 , I will update this across this across the document!

So, let's say we are configuring a pin in a sketch:

```arduino
// with default configuration, this enables pin 2 as an output
pinMode(2, OUTPUT);
```

But, using the ESP32 configuration (legacy):

```arduino
// with ESP32 configuration, this enables pin 2 as an output
pinMode(5, OUTPUT);
```

> 

Author: Aha yes we should definitely add that!

### Which Pin Config Should I Choose?

The answer to this depends on what platform you prefer most: if you are most familiar with Arduino & the Nano form factor, we recommend you use the default (Nano).

If you experience with the ESP32 platform, and not so much with the Arduino platform, the legacy (ESP32) configuration might be a better option. However please bare in mind that pins in the code will not match the Nano ESP32's physical pin labels.

> 

Author: @pillo79 Alessandro added a section at the top that I think describes it well, so I will remove section!

---
title: Nano ESP32 Selecting Pin Configuration 
description: Learn how to switch between default & ESP32 pin configurations when programming your board.
author: Karl Söderby
hardware:
  - hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-esp32
tags: [ESP32, Pin Configuration]
---

## Overview

The [Arduino Nano ESP32](https://store.arduino.cc/nano-esp32) is a Nano form factor board based on an ESP32-S3 SoC. This board is part of the [Arduino Nano Family](https://store.arduino.cc/pages/nano-family), and follows the same pinout as all Nano boards. This is very convenient if you want to port a project from another Nano board, as you can preserve the same wiring and pin numbers in the code.

This means that if you want to control a pin you can simply use the pin number that is printed on the board itself:

```arduino

> // This will enable the pin marked with "8" on the board:

Author: Ah yes that is correct!
